Source: https://chartschool.stockcharts.com/table-of-contents/overview/why-and-how-to-use-correlation

Why and How To Use Correlation | ChartSchool | StockCharts.com bars search circle-xmark ⌘ Ctrl k Return to StockCharts Charts &amp; Tools Articles Help Your Dashboard More ellipsis chevron-down 📋 ChartSchool Table of Contents Overview chevron-right Why Analyze Securities? Technical Analysis Fundamental Analysis Random Walk vs. Non-Random Walk Asset Allocation and Diversification Options Trading chevron-right John Murphy&#x27;s 10 Laws of Technical Trading John Murphy&#x27;s &quot;Charting Made Easy&quot; eBook Technical Analysis 101 chevron-right Irrational Exuberance Cognitive Biases Arthur Hill on Goals, Style and Strategy Arthur Hill on Moving Average Crossovers Multicollinearity &quot;The Trader&#x27;s Journal&quot; by Gatis Roze chevron-right Bob Farrell&#x27;s 10 Rules Richard Rhodes&#x27; Trading Rules Donchian Trading Guidelines Why and How To Use Correlation Chart Analysis chevron-right Technical Indicators &amp; Overlays chevron-right Market Indicators chevron-right Market Analysis chevron-right Trading Strategies &amp; Models chevron-right Index &amp; Market Indicator Catalog chevron-right 📖 Glossary chevron-right chevron-up chevron-down gitbook Powered by GitBook xmark block-quote On this page chevron-down copy Copy chevron-down Table of Contents chevron-right Overview Why and How To Use Correlation An explanation of why and how to use correlation to build a stronger, more diversified and stable portfolio. hashtag What Is Correlation? In statistics, correlation measures the degree to which two (or more) variables move together. Positive correlation values indicate movement together in the same direction. Negative correlation values indicate movement in opposite directions. Correlation values range from -1.0 to +1.0, with a value of 0 indicating no relationship between the variables. In finance and financial markets, correlation measures the relationship between two securities (stocks, bonds, ETFs, mutual funds, indexes, etc.) and the degree to which they move together. Securities with high positive correlation values move together in the same direction. Securities with high negative correlation values move in exactly opposite directions. Securities with very low correlation values (at or around 0) are unrelated with respect to the directions in which they move. hashtag Why Use Correlation? Correlation values can be used to construct a well-diversified portfolio, reducing risk while also improving returns. By building a portfolio that consists of a diverse set of securities across multiple asset classes, each with low correlation values, you can limit risk by reducing exposure to singular market shocks. hashtag How To Use Correlation To use correlation to your advantage, balance the securities in your portfolio according to their correlation values, while ensuring that the correlation values against a common benchmark (such as the S&amp;P 500) are not all clustered in a specific range. For example, if you have 10 stocks and funds in your portfolio, all with correlation values against the S&amp;P 500 ranging from +0.87 to +0.98, the assets in your portfolio can be shown to move in very similar directions, increasing your risk exposure to singular market shocks. If, however, the set of stocks and funds in your portfolio is more diverse and the correlation values range from, for example, -0.79 to +0.95, your portfolio can be considered more broadly diversified and thus less exposed to singular market shocks. Previous Donchian Trading Guidelines chevron-left Next Chart Analysis chevron-right Last updated 1 year ago Was this helpful? ON STOCKCHARTS Charts &amp; Tools Articles StockCharts TV ChartSchool MEMBERS Your Dashboard Your ChartLists Advanced Scans Technical Alerts HELP Support Center FAQs Contact Us Pricing COMPANY About Us What&#x27;s New © StockCharts.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved. What Is Correlation? Why Use Correlation? How To Use Correlation Was this helpful? sun-bright desktop moon sun-bright desktop moon